README.md, before:

# Optimizing Dense Retrieval Model Training with Hard Negatives
Jingtao Zhan, Jiaxin Mao, Yiqun Liu, Jiafeng Guo, Min Zhang, Shaoping Ma


This repo provides code, retrieval results, and trained models for our paper [Optimizing Dense Retrieval Model Training with Hard Negatives](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08051). The previous version is [Learning To Retrieve: How to Train a Dense Retrieval Model Effectively and Efficiently.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.10469)

Ranking has always been one of the top concerns in information retrieval researches. For decades, the lexical matching signal has dominated the ad-hoc retrieval process, but solely using this signal in retrieval may cause the vocabulary mismatch problem. In recent years, with the development of representation learning techniques, many researchers turn to Dense Retrieval (DR) models for better ranking performance. Although several existing DR models have already obtained promising results, their performance improvement heavily relies on the sampling of training examples. Many effective sampling strategies are not efficient enough for practical usage, and for most of them, there still lacks theoretical analysis in how and why performance improvement happens. 

To shed light on these research questions, we theoretically investigate different training strategies for DR models and try to explain why hard negative sampling performs better than random sampling. Through the analysis, we also find that there are many potential risks in static hard negative sampling, which is employed by many existing training methods. 

Therefore, we propose two training strategies named a Stable Training Algorithm for dense Retrieval (STAR) and a query-side training Algorithm for Directly Optimizing Ranking pErformance (ADORE), respectively. STAR improves the stability of DR training process by introducing random negatives. ADORE replaces the widely-adopted static hard negative sampling method with a dynamic one to directly optimize the ranking performance. Experimental results on two publicly available retrieval benchmark datasets show that either strategy gains significant improvements over existing competitive baselines and a combination of them leads to the best performance.

## Retrieval Results and Trained Models

| Passage Retrieval | Dev MRR@10  | Dev R@100 | Test NDCG@10 | Files |
|---------------- | ------------|-------| ------- | ------ |
| Inbatch-Neg     | 0.264 | 0.837 | 0.583 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ncFKzr4lz9qdI9ZXEi4AosQ_A900ELBz?usp=sharing) |
| Rand-Neg     | 0.301 | 0.853 | 0.612 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1BJNYcUiFh-Ukc2fibw-3NwPNnAYCZgO9?usp=sharing) |
| STAR     | 0.340 | 0.867 | 0.642 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bJw8P15cFiV239mTgFQxVilXMWqzqXUU?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1FRFTsqmU95IQHYHJ_q5SDCWVnxbWlIXi/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QkPYmpvI3PX3vWZEO4zsEcoxLipIEsHA/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1VBPJKKrkZw7RAS5gUJX--lb6Qsu-72D8/view?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Inbatch-Neg) | 0.316 | 0.860 | 0.658 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Kuwnit7SBoMVZ6s2Mz9RAORQlYU6zG8K?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Rand-Neg) | 0.326 | 0.865 | 0.661 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1U8Nq_LLyVZPh26_ldnSAvsYNk7g43IkE?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (STAR) | 0.347 | 0.876 | 0.683 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1C1GQGfI4UHg99rfRcPYzQxlGZXvtsDfm?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1zJTPwnUdX_1vkcaQ4SLwtF4L-h24oQOg/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pm4pRimapKZDVqnvLpiYFmgBRKdKlJZW/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/19Vp57INLBszrO6qk6eCfcaH3oY-5HDKR/view?usp=sharing) [Leaderboard](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com)|


| Doc Retrieval | Dev MRR@100  | Dev R@100 | Test NDCG@10 | Files |
|---------------- | ------------|-------| ------- | ------ |
| Inbatch-Neg     | 0.320 | 0.864 | 0.544 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1wQ6bCH8TjNxazVoKW08DmggPOjO2-Y-H?usp=sharing) |
| Rand-Neg     | 0.330 | 0.859 | 0.572 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/15oGEZbOeqWz0k77R_xE26VBwcEo4VJuE?usp=sharing) |
| STAR     | 0.390 | 0.867 | 0.605 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/18GrqZxeiYFxeMfSs97UxkVHwIhZPVXTc?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Gcp7dbAzpslIIaV_KFkZg4UOkp0ev_eL/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/17yR6BRLzfW1bxr-VaQ2w2cKpClgcFTej/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Mh2BtPYvXRnT2Uz2ZYALZuXQQq3IHApS/view?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Inbatch-Neg) | 0.362 | 0.884 | 0.580 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Lvz8aLZyzqm9faCWzoQfJJwbL4vdZu2l?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Rand-Neg) | 0.361 | 0.885 | 0.585 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1gH5pTfqBkComxPXhFgdbPRD9r1vZWYZO?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (STAR) | 0.405 | 0.919 | 0.628 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1p9FZ8iqqZ9rsfgDzntlNBVKNEf7-2Hih?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1XGXdo6LG8VwHvtCbevbvmu3GkwPiV_NC/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1vY_q-jzU0CHhOtv_UIYSDkU-l6Kj8fEX/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1N1ouaMgNdPhjqJMXUBOU5Rg28_T7wapv/view?usp=sharing) [Leaderboard](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com)|

If you want to use our first-stage leaderboard runs, [contact me](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com) and I will send you the file.

If any links fail or the files go wrong, please contact me or open a issue.

## Requirements

To install requirements, run the following commands:

```setup
git clone git@github.com:jingtaozhan/DRhard.git
cd DRhard
python setup.py install
```
However, you need to set up a new python enverionment for data preprocessing (see below).

## Data Download
To download all the needed data, run:
```
bash download_data.sh
```

## Data Preprocess
You need to set up a new environment with `transformers==2.8.0` to tokenize the text. This is because we find the tokenizer behaves differently among versions 2, 3 and 4. To replicate the results in our paper with our provided trained models, it is necessary to use version `2.8.0` for preprocessing. Otherwise, you may need to re-train the DR models. 

Run the following codes.
```bash
python preprocess.py --data_type 0; python preprocess.py --data_type 1
```

## Inference
With our provided trained models, you can easily replicate our reported experimental results. Note that minor variance may be observed due to environmental difference. 

### STAR
The following codes use the provided STAR model to compute query/passage embeddings and perform similarity search  on the dev set. (You can use `--faiss_gpus` option to use gpus for much faster similarity search.)
```bash
python ./star/inference.py --data_type passage --max_doc_length 256 --mode dev   
python ./star/inference.py --data_type doc --max_doc_length 512 --mode dev   
```

Run the following code to evaluate on MSMARCO Passage dataset.
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/passage/evaluate/star/dev.rank.tsv
```
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.3404237731386721
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

Run the following code to evaluate on MSMARCO Document dataset.
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/doc/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/doc/evaluate/star/dev.rank.tsv 100
```
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @100: 0.3903422772218344
QueriesRanked: 5193
#####################
```

### ADORE

ADORE computes the query embeddings. The document embeddings are pre-computed by other DR models, like STAR. The following codes use the provided ADORE(STAR) model to compute query embeddings and perform similarity search  on the dev set. (You can use `--faiss_gpus` option to use gpus for much faster similarity search.)

```bash
python ./adore/inference.py --model_dir ./data/passage/trained_models/adore-star --output_dir ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star --preprocess_dir ./data/passage/preprocess --mode dev --dmemmap_path ./data/passage/evaluate/star/passages.memmap
python ./adore/inference.py --model_dir ./data/doc/trained_models/adore-star --output_dir ./data/doc/evaluate/adore-star --preprocess_dir ./data/doc/preprocess --mode dev --dmemmap_path ./data/doc/evaluate/star/passages.memmap
```

Evaluate ADORE(STAR) model on dev passage dataset:
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.34660697230181425
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

Evaluate ADORE(STAR) model on dev document dataset:
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/doc/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/doc/evaluate/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv 100
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @100: 0.4049777020859768
QueriesRanked: 5193
#####################
```

### Convert QID/PID Back
Our data preprocessing reassigns new ids for each query and document. Therefore, you may want to convert the ids back. We provide a script for this. 

The following code shows an example to convert ADORE-STAR's ranking results on the dev passage dataset.
```bash
python ./cvt_back.py --input_dir ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star/ --preprocess_dir ./data/passage/preprocess --output_dir ./data/passage/official_runs/adore-star --mode dev --dataset passage
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/dataset/qrels.dev.small.tsv ./data/passage/official_runs/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.34660697230181425
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

## Train
Instructions are coming soon.

Commit message:

add a figure to summarize different methods

README.md, after:

# Optimizing Dense Retrieval Model Training with Hard Negatives
Jingtao Zhan, Jiaxin Mao, Yiqun Liu, Jiafeng Guo, Min Zhang, Shaoping Ma

This repo provides code, retrieval results, and trained models for our SIGIR Full paper [Optimizing Dense Retrieval Model Training with Hard Negatives](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08051). The previous version is [Learning To Retrieve: How to Train a Dense Retrieval Model Effectively and Efficiently.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.10469)

We achieve very impressive retrieval results on both passage and document retrieval bechmarks. The proposed two algorithms (STAR and ADORE) are very efficient. IMHO, they are well worth trying and most likely improve your retriever's performance by a large margin. 

The following figure shows the pros and cons of different training methods. You can train an effective Dense Retrieval model in three steps. Firstly, warmup your model using random negatives or BM25 top negatives. Secondly, use our proposed STAR to train the query encoder and document encoder. Thirdly, use our proposed ADORE to train the query encoder. 
![image](./figures/summary.png)

## Retrieval Results and Trained Models

| Passage Retrieval | Dev MRR@10  | Dev R@100 | Test NDCG@10 | Files |
|---------------- | ------------|-------| ------- | ------ |
| Inbatch-Neg     | 0.264 | 0.837 | 0.583 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ncFKzr4lz9qdI9ZXEi4AosQ_A900ELBz?usp=sharing) |
| Rand-Neg     | 0.301 | 0.853 | 0.612 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1BJNYcUiFh-Ukc2fibw-3NwPNnAYCZgO9?usp=sharing) |
| STAR     | 0.340 | 0.867 | 0.642 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bJw8P15cFiV239mTgFQxVilXMWqzqXUU?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1FRFTsqmU95IQHYHJ_q5SDCWVnxbWlIXi/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QkPYmpvI3PX3vWZEO4zsEcoxLipIEsHA/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1VBPJKKrkZw7RAS5gUJX--lb6Qsu-72D8/view?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Inbatch-Neg) | 0.316 | 0.860 | 0.658 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Kuwnit7SBoMVZ6s2Mz9RAORQlYU6zG8K?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Rand-Neg) | 0.326 | 0.865 | 0.661 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1U8Nq_LLyVZPh26_ldnSAvsYNk7g43IkE?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (STAR) | 0.347 | 0.876 | 0.683 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1C1GQGfI4UHg99rfRcPYzQxlGZXvtsDfm?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1zJTPwnUdX_1vkcaQ4SLwtF4L-h24oQOg/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pm4pRimapKZDVqnvLpiYFmgBRKdKlJZW/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/19Vp57INLBszrO6qk6eCfcaH3oY-5HDKR/view?usp=sharing) [Leaderboard](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com)|


| Doc Retrieval | Dev MRR@100  | Dev R@100 | Test NDCG@10 | Files |
|---------------- | ------------|-------| ------- | ------ |
| Inbatch-Neg     | 0.320 | 0.864 | 0.544 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1wQ6bCH8TjNxazVoKW08DmggPOjO2-Y-H?usp=sharing) |
| Rand-Neg     | 0.330 | 0.859 | 0.572 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/15oGEZbOeqWz0k77R_xE26VBwcEo4VJuE?usp=sharing) |
| STAR     | 0.390 | 0.867 | 0.605 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/18GrqZxeiYFxeMfSs97UxkVHwIhZPVXTc?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Gcp7dbAzpslIIaV_KFkZg4UOkp0ev_eL/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/17yR6BRLzfW1bxr-VaQ2w2cKpClgcFTej/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Mh2BtPYvXRnT2Uz2ZYALZuXQQq3IHApS/view?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Inbatch-Neg) | 0.362 | 0.884 | 0.580 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Lvz8aLZyzqm9faCWzoQfJJwbL4vdZu2l?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (Rand-Neg) | 0.361 | 0.885 | 0.585 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1gH5pTfqBkComxPXhFgdbPRD9r1vZWYZO?usp=sharing) |
| ADORE (STAR) | 0.405 | 0.919 | 0.628 | [Model](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1p9FZ8iqqZ9rsfgDzntlNBVKNEf7-2Hih?usp=sharing) [Train](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1XGXdo6LG8VwHvtCbevbvmu3GkwPiV_NC/view?usp=sharing) [Dev](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1vY_q-jzU0CHhOtv_UIYSDkU-l6Kj8fEX/view?usp=sharing) [TRECTest](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1N1ouaMgNdPhjqJMXUBOU5Rg28_T7wapv/view?usp=sharing) [Leaderboard](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com)|

If you want to use our first-stage leaderboard runs, [contact me](mailto:jingtaozhan@gmail.com) and I will send you the file.

If any links fail or the files go wrong, please contact me or open a issue.

## Requirements

To install requirements, run the following commands:

```setup
git clone git@github.com:jingtaozhan/DRhard.git
cd DRhard
python setup.py install
```
However, you need to set up a new python enverionment for data preprocessing (see below).

## Data Download
To download all the needed data, run:
```
bash download_data.sh
```

## Data Preprocess
You need to set up a new environment with `transformers==2.8.0` to tokenize the text. This is because we find the tokenizer behaves differently among versions 2, 3 and 4. To replicate the results in our paper with our provided trained models, it is necessary to use version `2.8.0` for preprocessing. Otherwise, you may need to re-train the DR models. 

Run the following codes.
```bash
python preprocess.py --data_type 0; python preprocess.py --data_type 1
```

## Inference
With our provided trained models, you can easily replicate our reported experimental results. Note that minor variance may be observed due to environmental difference. 

### STAR
The following codes use the provided STAR model to compute query/passage embeddings and perform similarity search  on the dev set. (You can use `--faiss_gpus` option to use gpus for much faster similarity search.)
```bash
python ./star/inference.py --data_type passage --max_doc_length 256 --mode dev   
python ./star/inference.py --data_type doc --max_doc_length 512 --mode dev   
```

Run the following code to evaluate on MSMARCO Passage dataset.
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/passage/evaluate/star/dev.rank.tsv
```
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.3404237731386721
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

Run the following code to evaluate on MSMARCO Document dataset.
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/doc/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/doc/evaluate/star/dev.rank.tsv 100
```
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @100: 0.3903422772218344
QueriesRanked: 5193
#####################
```

### ADORE

ADORE computes the query embeddings. The document embeddings are pre-computed by other DR models, like STAR. The following codes use the provided ADORE(STAR) model to compute query embeddings and perform similarity search  on the dev set. (You can use `--faiss_gpus` option to use gpus for much faster similarity search.)

```bash
python ./adore/inference.py --model_dir ./data/passage/trained_models/adore-star --output_dir ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star --preprocess_dir ./data/passage/preprocess --mode dev --dmemmap_path ./data/passage/evaluate/star/passages.memmap
python ./adore/inference.py --model_dir ./data/doc/trained_models/adore-star --output_dir ./data/doc/evaluate/adore-star --preprocess_dir ./data/doc/preprocess --mode dev --dmemmap_path ./data/doc/evaluate/star/passages.memmap
```

Evaluate ADORE(STAR) model on dev passage dataset:
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.34660697230181425
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

Evaluate ADORE(STAR) model on dev document dataset:
```bash
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/doc/preprocess/dev-qrel.tsv ./data/doc/evaluate/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv 100
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @100: 0.4049777020859768
QueriesRanked: 5193
#####################
```

### Convert QID/PID Back
Our data preprocessing reassigns new ids for each query and document. Therefore, you may want to convert the ids back. We provide a script for this. 

The following code shows an example to convert ADORE-STAR's ranking results on the dev passage dataset.
```bash
python ./cvt_back.py --input_dir ./data/passage/evaluate/adore-star/ --preprocess_dir ./data/passage/preprocess --output_dir ./data/passage/official_runs/adore-star --mode dev --dataset passage
python ./msmarco_eval.py ./data/passage/dataset/qrels.dev.small.tsv ./data/passage/official_runs/adore-star/dev.rank.tsv
```
You will get
```bash
Eval Started
#####################
MRR @10: 0.34660697230181425
QueriesRanked: 6980
#####################
```

## Train
Instructions will be ready this weekend (7.18).
